---
published: true
---

## INTRODUCTION

Clive Humby, a mathematician once said that “Data is the new oil”. What did he mean by that? 

Data in the simplest of definitions is a collection of facts from which conclusions can be drawn. Over the years, we have seen an exponential increase in the amount of data produced on a daily basis from sources like social media, digital media, purchase transaction records and cell phone GPS signals. Such data is so large and complex that it becomes impossible for traditional data management tools to efficiently store and process it. Such data is ‘Big Data’.

Gartner defines Big Data as 
> Big Data is high-volume, and high-velocity, and/or high-variety information assets that demand cost-effective, innovative forms of information processing that enable enhanced insight, decision making, and process automation.

In a simpler form, big data is about the analysis of very large files of untouched data to extract insights and integrate those insights into your business operations in order to lead to better decision and strategic business moves. 
Big Data comes in to fill the gap where traditional data handling tools can’t, therefore it’s about the application of new tools to do MORE analytics on MORE data for MORE people. 

## Characteristics of Big Data:

+ **Volume**: 
The amount of generated data is vast compared to traditional sources. There is a need to cost effectively process this growing volume of data.

+ **Velocity**: 
Velocity is the speed at which data is generated. Currently, there are over 30 billion RFID sensors in the world. Data from all these sources needs to be made sense of. There is a need to respond to the increasing velocity of data from the increasing data sources. 

+ **Variety**: 
Variety refers to heterogeneous sources and the nature of data, both structured and unstructured. This is data from emails, spreadsheets, databases, photos, videos, monitoring devices, audio among others. 
80% of the world’s data is unstructured. There is a need to collectively analyse the broadening variety of data. 

+ **Veracity**:
Veracity refers to the quality of correctness of the generated data. Big data is collected from very many different sources, therefore there is a need to test the quality of the data. 

## PERSONAL CRITIQUE OF BIG DATA

The evolution of big data is so rapid, its benefits immense to ignore. Big data eliminates intuition by providing insightful results wholly based on the aggregation and analysis of huge amounts of relevant information. These data driven insights are used to predict future trends thereby guiding decision making. 
Big data provides businesses with the great opportunity of knowing what decisions to be made, when to take action and how these decisions will impact on financial results and operational performance. 
That is not to say that big data comes with no risks, flaws or limitations. Most of the data is collected from communication devices, such as sensors, computers and cell phones. These devices have to be connected to the internet. In the African context, due to the low internet penetration rates, very few communication devices are connected to the internet. Because of this, a fraction of the population, consisting mostly of the poor is not captured by the data collection exercise. This eventually leads to user bias. 
 
## TECHNOLOGIES BORN BY BIG DATA 


Here we look at a list of technologies that enable the integration of insights into the fabric of business;

•	**Predictive Analytics**:
This involves the usage of various technologies ranging from data mining, to statistics to machine learning, to artificial intelligence to analyse existing data sets to provide insights by identifying patterns. This helps predict future outcomes and improve business performance and mitigate risks.  

•	**Stream analytics**:
This is the analysis of large in motion data. This data comes from various live data sources and the analysis is done in order to detect urgent situations and automate immediate actions. 

•	**Search and Knowledge discovery**: 
Tools and techniques that support the self-service extraction of useful information, extract insights from the large amounts of data sourced from disparate sources.

•	**NoSQL database**:
A database that represents a shift away from the traditional relational databases management systems. NoSQL has three types; Key-value, document and graph databases. All these three increase how fast data is looked up 

## UGANDAN CONTEXT

The benefits of big data on the global scene are very evident. However, the integration of big data in Ugandan businesses has been slow. Below are some areas where I think big data can be leveraged to provide more insightful information and drive business profitability;

+ **Banking**:
Most bank departments work like silos. Customer information is all over the place, it’s hard to integrate it into one single customer profile. As such there is a need to aggregate all the relevant customer information collected by all these disparate departments, optimize it, analyse it to provide insights into the behavior of individual customers and further guide on how the individual customer should be dealt with.

+ **Insurance**:
Insurance firms face high rates of frauds, have long processes of legitimizing claims. As such there is a need to provide insights into which claims are legitimate and to spot fraud. This will help reduce the claim process, and reduce operational costs in the process thereby driving business operations and increasing profitability. 

+ **Healthcare**:
Patients’ data can be aggregated from disparate sources like pharmacies, clinics, and hospitals to create one accurate patient profile. Analysis into this information can give birth to data driven recommendations on course of treatments. 

+ **Advertising**:
As the rate of internet and smartphone penetration increases, the number of Ugandans using social media and other internet resources is bound to increase.
Analysis of social media posts, likes, comments and retweets can help advertisers to push tailored adverts to millions of customers in real time.  

